Added OpenTelemetry related blog post (#343)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2023-02-27-opentelemetry.md

---
layout: post
title: "Tracing in Apache Kafka: from OpenTracing to OpenTelemetry"
date: 2023-02-27
author: paolo_patierno
---

> Apache Kafka has emerged as a popular platform for event and data streaming, providing a reliable backbone for microservices communication in distributed systems.

Reviewer: Add link to https://kafka.apache.org?

* Monitoring the flow of events or remote procedure calls between applications.
* Profiling message latency in order to help optimizing performance.
* Providing an overall picture about how microservices communicate across boundaries.

Strimzi has provided tracing support, for Kafka Connect, Kafka MirrorMaker and the Kafka Bridge, since the 0.14.0 release by leveraging the [OpenTracing](https://opentracing.io/) project.
But since then, the distributed tracing ecosystem has changed. The OpenTracing project was archived and replaced by a new project, [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/).

> Tha Apache Kafka project itself doesn't have support for tracing, so when messages flow through brokers no further tracing information is added.

This blog post will show you how to use OpenTelemetry within the Strimzi project and what are the differences with OpenTracing, which is now deprecated and will be removed in the coming months.

## What is OpenTelemetry?

OpenTelemetry is an open source and vendor neutral project providing tools, APIs, and SDKs used to generate, collect and export telemetry data.

> It is part of the Cloud Native Computing Foundation and it is available across several languages.

Reviewer: Add link to CNCF?

Focusing on Apache Kafka, the application could be a producer or consumer, or one of the components managed by the Strimzi operator, such as Kafka Connect, Kafka MirrorMaker and the Kafka Bridge.

As it happens, with OpenTracing even the OpenTelemetry exporter doesn't send all traces but often just part of them by using sampling.

## How to enable OpenTelemetry

Prior to the addition of OpenTelemetry support, users could enable distributed tracing on custom resources such as `KafkaConnect`, `KafkaMirrorMaker`, `KafkaMirrorMaker2`, and `KafkaBridge` by setting the `spec.tracing.type` property to `jaeger`, which allowed them to use OpenTracing.
Since the Strimzi 0.33.0 release, you can set the corresponding `opentelemetry` value for using OpenTelemetry instead.

```yaml
# ...
spec:
  # ...
  tracing:
    type: opentelemetry
  # ...  
```

With the above setting, the Strimzi operator initializes the OpenTelemetry tracer using the default OTLP exporter, for sending traces to the tracing backend.
But you also need to specify environment variables to configure the exporter itself, by using the `spec.template` properties.

> The following example is for `KafkaBridge` configuration:

Author: not sure about this, because the suggestion was made by @PaulRMellor before ... Paul wdyt?

> The following example is for `KafkaBridge` configuration:

Reviewer 2: Change is fine by me

But you also need to specify environment variables to configure the exporter itself, by using the `spec.template` properties.
Following, an example of the `KafkaBridge` configuration.

```yaml
spec:
  #...
  template:
    bridgeContainer:
      env:
        - name: OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
          value: my-bridge-otel-service
        - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT
          value: "http://jaeger-host:4317"
  tracing:
    type: opentelemetry
```

> It is using the service name `my-bridge-otel-service` which will show up in the backend UI.

Author: I prephrased as `It is using the service name `my-bridge-otel-service` which will show up in the list of available services in the Jaeger backend UI`

> > The service name is specific to the operand you are using in order to group multiple traces together. You should use a different service name for any other operand (i.e. Kafka Connect, Kafka Mirror Maker, ...)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The service name is specific to the operand you are using in order to group multiple traces together. You should use a different service name for any other operand (i.e. Kafka Connect, Kafka MirrorMaker, ...)
```

You would also need to set the `OTEL_EXPORTER_JAEGER_ENDPOINT` instead of the above `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` to specify a Jaeger protocol endpoint.

>  If you are using Jaeger as the backend system for tracing, you need to have Jaeger 1.35 at least, which is the first to expose an OTLP endpoint. Find more details about starting the backend with the `COLLECTOR_OTLP_ENABLED` environment variable set in the [Jaeger documentation](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.41/getting-started/).

## OpenTelemetry in action

Assuming you already have the Strimzi operator running on your Kubernetes instance, together with an Apache Kafka cluster, the first step to using OpenTelemetry is to install a tracing backend to get the traces from your applications.
As already mentioned, the Jaeger backend can still be used together with the OTLP endpoint enabled, so let's use this one.

#### Installing the Jaeger backend

The easiest way to deploy the Jaeger backend on Kubernetes is to use the Jaeger Operator.
One of the pre-requisites for the latest releases is having the cert-manager already installed as well.

> The cert-manager installation is just about running the following command:

Author: `You can install cert-manager installation ... ` are you sure? install and installation together?

> The cert-manager installation is just about running the following command:

Reviewer: Oops, it should be `You can install cert-manager by running the following command:`

> The cert-manager installation is just about running the following command:

Author: I fixed as `You can install cert-manager by running ....`

```shell
kubectl create namespace observability
kubectl create -f https://github.com/jaegertracing/jaeger-operator/releases/download/v1.41.0/jaeger-operator.yaml -n observability
```

With the Jaeger Operator up and running, you can now create a `Jaeger` custom resource describing the Jaeger instance to install.
Following, the simplest `Jaeger` definition which is enough for our purposes:

```yaml
apiVersion: jaegertracing.io/v1
kind: Jaeger
metadata:
  name: simplest
```

Create a `simplest-jaeger.yaml` file with the above declaration and install it:

```shell
kubectl apply -f simplest-jaeger.yaml
```

With the Jaeger instance running, an OTLP endpoint for getting the traces is exposed through the `http://simplest-collector:4317` service.

> If using Minikube, you can use the port-forwarding to have access to the Jaeger Web UI easily from your local browser at `http://localhost:16686`. Just use the corresponding command `kubectl port-forward svc/simplest-query 16686:16686`.

For more details, the official Jaeger documentation explains all the steps [here](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/latest/operator/).

> ## Let's trace the HTTP bridge traffic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Let's trace the Kafka Bridge traffic
```

Let's take the Strimzi HTTP bridge as an example of tracing to show how OpenTelemetry works.
The first step is to deploy a `KafkaBridge` instance with the tracing enabled and the corresponding environment variables to configure the OTLP exporter.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaBridge
metadata:
  name: my-bridge
spec:
  replicas: 1
  bootstrapServers: my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092
  http:
    port: 8080
  template:
    bridgeContainer:
      env:
        - name: OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
          value: my-bridge-otel-service
        - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT
          value: http://simplest-collector:4317
  tracing:
    type: opentelemetry
```

> With the HTTP bridge up and running, we can use any HTTP client for sending and receiving messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the Kafka Bridge running, we can use any HTTP client for sending and receiving messages.
```

> It could be a simple command line tool like `cURL`, a more UI oriented like [Postman](https://www.postman.com/) or whatever is your preferred one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It could be a simple command line tool like `cURL`, a more UI oriented like [Postman](https://www.postman.com/) or whatever you prefer.
```

You could also use an application you developed with your preferred language.

> For the purpose of this blog post, I used the Java HTTP client examples we have in the Strimzi repository [here](https://github.com/strimzi/client-examples).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the purpose of this blog post, we use the Java HTTP client examples from the  [Strimzi repository](https://github.com/strimzi/client-examples).
```

> By getting the [deployment-tracing-opentelemetry.yaml](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/client-examples/main/java/http/deployment-tracing-opentelemetry.yaml) YAML file you are able to deploy:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By getting the [deployment-tracing-opentelemetry.yaml](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/strimzi/client-examples/main/java/http/deployment-tracing-opentelemetry.yaml) YAML file you are able to deploy the following:
```

> * a producer Java HTTP client which sends a message every second to the Apache Kafka cluster through the Strimzi HTTP bridge.
> * a consumer Java HTTP client which polls for messages every second from the Apache Kafka cluster through the Strimzi HTTP bridge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A producer Java HTTP client which sends a message every second to the Apache Kafka cluster through the Kafka Bridge.
* A consumer Java HTTP client which polls for messages every second from the Apache Kafka cluster through the Kafka Bridge.
```

Both applications are configured in order to trace the HTTP requests they send to the bridge.

Get the above file and change the OpenTelemetry exporter configuration `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` environment variable related to the Jaeger OTLP endpoint for sending the traces.

```yaml
env:
  # ...
  - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT
    value: http://simplest-collector:4317
  # ...
```

Save and deploy the YAML:

```shell
kubectl apply -f deployment-tracing-opentelemetry.yaml
```

When the HTTP clients exchange the messages we can see the traces and the corresponding spans in the Jaeger Web UI.

![](/assets/images/posts/2023-02-27-opentelemetry-01.png)

> In the above picture, the HTTP producer sends a message and it is received by the HTTP consumer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the above screen capture, the HTTP producer sends a message and it is received by the HTTP consumer.
```

When the HTTP client sends a producer request, you can see three spans linked together as part of the same trace:

> * the first span describes the HTTP `send-messages` operation generated on the client and propagated to the bridge. This span is created by the HTTP producer client itself instrumented with OpenTelemetry.
> * the second span describes the HTTP `send` operation requested by the client and tracked on the bridge. This span is created by the bridge application itself instrumented with OpenTelemetry. It is linked to the first span with a "CHILD_OF" relationship.
> * the third span describes the low level Kafka `send` operation to the `my-topic` topic which is a "CHILD_OF" the previous one. This span is created by the instrumented Kafka client provided by the OpenTelemetry project. It uses a producer interceptor for creating the span.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The first span describes the HTTP `send-messages` operation generated on the client and propagated to the bridge. This span is created by the HTTP producer client itself instrumented with OpenTelemetry.
* The second span describes the HTTP `send` operation requested by the client and tracked on the bridge. This span is created by the bridge application itself instrumented with OpenTelemetry. It is linked to the first span with a "CHILD_OF" relationship.
* The third span describes the low level Kafka `send` operation to the `my-topic` topic which is a "CHILD_OF" the previous one. This span is created by the instrumented Kafka client provided by the OpenTelemetry project. It uses a producer interceptor for creating the span.
```

![](/assets/images/posts/2023-02-27-opentelemetry-02.png)

In the same way, when the HTTP consumer sends a poll request for receiving the messages, you can see three spans linked together as part of the same trace:

> * the first span describes the HTTP `consume-messages` operation generated on the client and propagated to the bridge. This span is created by the HTTP consumer client itself instrumented with OpenTelemetry.
> * the second span describes the HTTP `poll` operation requested by the client and tracked on the bridge. This span is created by the bridge application itself instrumented with OpenTelemetry. It is linked to the first span with a "CHILD_OF" relationship.
> * the third span describes the low level Kafka `receive` operation on the `my-topic` topic related to the message received. It is "CHILD_OF" the previous span but at the same time it is referencing the external trace related to the producer with a "FOLLOW_FROM" relationship. This span is created by the instrumented Kafka client provided by the OpenTelemetry project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The first span describes the HTTP `consume-messages` operation generated on the client and propagated to the bridge. This span is created by the HTTP consumer client itself instrumented with OpenTelemetry.
* The second span describes the HTTP `poll` operation requested by the client and tracked on the bridge. This span is created by the bridge application itself instrumented with OpenTelemetry. It is linked to the first span with a "CHILD_OF" relationship.
* The third span describes the low level Kafka `receive` operation on the `my-topic` topic related to the message received. It is "CHILD_OF" the previous span, but at the same time it is referencing the external trace related to the producer with a "FOLLOW_FROM" relationship. This span is created by the instrumented Kafka client provided by the OpenTelemetry project.
```

![](/assets/images/posts/2023-02-27-opentelemetry-03.png)

> It is interesting to highlight that, due to the asynchronous nature of the communication between producer and consumer through the HTTP bridge and Kafka, the producing and consuming parts are traced with two different traces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is interesting to highlight that, due to the asynchronous nature of the communication between producer and consumer through the Kafka Bridge and Kafka, the producing and consuming parts are traced with two different traces.
```

> The consuming related spans are linked to the producing trace spans by using a "FOLLOW_FROM" relationship.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The consumer-related spans are linked to the producing trace spans by using a "FOLLOW_FROM" relationship.
```

> This takes into account that same messages could be consumed by multiple consumers or read again by the same consumer in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This takes into account that the same messages could be consumed by multiple consumers or read again by the same consumer in the future.
```

> Having different consumer traces linked to the producer one makes more sense than having an heavy and not so easy to navigate bigger trace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Having different consumer traces linked to the producer trace makes more sense than having a bigger trace that is not so easy to navigate.
```

> ## Kafka Connect, Mirror Maker(s) and clients

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Adding OpenTelemetry tracing to Kafka Connect and MirrorMaker
```

> As already mentioned before, Strimzi supports tracing on Kafka Connect and Mirror Maker(s) components other than the HTTP bridge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As already mentioned before, Strimzi supports tracing on Kafka Connect and MirrorMaker.
```

> In this blog [post](https://strimzi.io/blog/2019/10/08/strimzi-apache-kafka-and-tracing/) we already covered them by using OpenTracing at that time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a [previous blog post](https://strimzi.io/blog/2019/10/08/strimzi-apache-kafka-and-tracing/) we already covered them by using OpenTracing at that time.
```

In this blog [post](https://strimzi.io/blog/2019/10/08/strimzi-apache-kafka-and-tracing/) we already covered them by using OpenTracing at that time.

> In order to use OpenTelemetry instead, the set up is quite the same with the following changes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to use OpenTelemetry instead, the set up is quite similar but with the following changes:
```

> * the `spec.tracing.type` has to be `opentelemetry`.
> * the environment variables to be set in the `spec.template` are the ones related to OpenTelemetry as by the HTTP bridge example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `spec.tracing.type` has to be `opentelemetry`.
* The environment variables to be set in the `spec.template` are the ones related to OpenTelemetry as with the Kafka Bridge example.
```

> By using Jaeger as backend, you will get the traces the same way as described in the older blog post.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using Jaeger as the backend, you get the traces the same way as described in the OpenTracing blog post.
```

> Of course, OpenTelemetry can be used to add tracing to your application as well.
> The purpose is about having end-to-end tracing information from producer to consumer, not only related to the components where the messages are flowing through (i.e. HTTP bridge).
> This is not something Strimzi specific but it is mostly about using the OpenTelemetry instrumentation libraries.
> The Java HTTP clients, we used before together with the bridge, are good examples of instrumenting an application using OpenTelemetry.
> In order to help community users to a smoother approach on instrumenting their application, you can find more details on the Strimzi documentation about [Initializing tracing for Kafka clients](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying.html#proc-configuring-tracers-kafka-clients-str).
> The documentation guide your through instrumenting Kafka client API based applications as well as Kafka Streams ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Adding OpenTelemetry tracing to client applications

Of course, OpenTelemetry can be used to add tracing to your application as well.
The purpose is about having end-to-end tracing information from producer to consumer, not only related to the components where the messages are flowing through, like Kafka Bridge.
This is not something Strimzi-specific but it is mostly about using the OpenTelemetry instrumentation libraries.
The Java HTTP clients we used with the bridge are good examples of instrumenting an application using OpenTelemetry.
For a smoother approach on instrumenting their application, you can find more details in the  [Strimzi documentation for initializing tracing for Kafka clients](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying.html#proc-configuring-tracers-kafka-clients-str).
The documentation guides you through instrumenting Kafka client API based applications as well as Kafka Streams applications.
```

> You can also read more on this blog [post](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2022/instrument-kafka-clients/) on the official OpenTelemetry website.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also read more on this blog post on the [OpenTelemetry website](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2022/instrument-kafka-clients/).
```

## Conclusion

Evaluating performance and getting insights about issues in a distributed system is a really complex task.
This is where distributed tracing helps.

> After the OpenTracing project was archived, the Cloud Native Computing Foundation community moved to a new shiny project, OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the OpenTracing project was archived, the Cloud Native Computing Foundation community moved to a shiny new project, OpenTelemetry.
```

> Strimzi is already moving forward on that direction, by deprecating OpenTracing and providing you support for OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Strimzi is already moving forward in that direction, by deprecating OpenTracing and providing you support for OpenTelemetry.
```

The plan is to support, if possible, OpenTracing until June 2023 and remove it afterward.
We encourage you to move as soon as possible.

> In the coming months, the OpenTracing support will be removed from all the Strimzi components and OpenTelemetry will be the only one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the coming months, the OpenTracing support will be removed from all the Strimzi components and OpenTelemetry will be the only supported tracing option.
```

> For any kind of problems don't hesitate to get in touch with the Strimzi community, we'll be happy to help you!

Reviewer: Should we link to https://strimzi.io/join-us/?
